In this segment, I'm going to
introduce context-free grammars and
their extension into probabilities,
probabilistic context-free grammars.
So this is what a linguist calls a phrase
structure grammar which is also known In
computer science there's a context
free grammar, same thing.
And, so what we have are these
various rules where we have a category
which rewrites as a sequence
of other categories and then
eventually this writes down to, what are
called terminal symbols, which are words.
And so using this grammar
we can produce sentences.
So we start with the start symbol S and
then we can expand down using any of the
rules of the grammar, so S goes to NP, VP,
and then there is a rule
that says a noun phrase
goes to a noun and
then a noun can go to say people.
And then, a verb phrase, and
go to a verb and a noun phrase.
And the verb can go to say fish and
the noun phrase can go to a noun again,
and the noun, can go to, say, tanks.
And so using this grammar,
we can make sentences of the language.
So here are two sentences in the language.
We just saw that this one was
a sentence of the language, and
this is another sentence of the language.
If you look carefully and
play around with it a bit,
you'll see that this is actually a very,
very ambiguous grammar.
So sentences like, people,
people, people, people,
people or fish, fish, fish,
are also sentences of this language.
Okay, so
what is context free grammar formally?
So context free grammar
formally is a two ball,
consisting of a set of terminal symbols.
So they were our words like fish and
people.
A set of nonterminal symbols.
Those were our ones like S and NP for
noun phrase, and VP for verb phrase.
A start symbol,
which is one of the nonterminal symbols.
And then we have a set of rules or
productions of the form and
nonterminal rewrites as some
sequence of nonterminals or
terminals, like VP goes to V NP PP and
that's our sequence.
So this gives us a grammar, and
what we'll say is that
a grammar generates a language.
A language L is all the sentences
that can be produced by doing that
process of rewriting from the start symbol
down to down to a sequence of terminals.
And in many cases when there's any
complexity in there the size of that
language will be infinite and it won't
actually include all possible strings.
So that's the formal definition
of context-free grammar.
In practice, when we're working on
linguistics and computational linguistics,
we always make a couple of refinements
from that to this, which aren't super
theoretically interesting, but give us a
more natural form for linguistic purposes.
So let's just quickly look at this.
So here's how NLP phase structure grammar.
So how's it different?
It's different because we've
introduced set of pre terminal symbols.
So in practice when we're doing linguistic
grammars always most always we have
rules with non terminals like noun
phrase goes to determine a noun.
And then we have, and this part up here,
we often refer to as our grammar.
And then we have a lexicon
where we have words,
terminal symbols that
belong to categories.
So and we write as the or
nn, can rewrite as man.
So in the first definition preterminals,
the lexical categories
had no special status.
But we'd kind of like them to,
and so that's what we do here.
So we say that our categories, our nouns,
verbs, and so on, are the preterminals.
And then we have terminals.
Now the words as before and
then the non-terminals really
become our phrasal category.
These things like noun phrase.
Okay, but nothing else really changes.
We have a start symbol.
Our lexicon is now just rules of the form
that a preterminal rewrites as a terminal,
and then our grammar is a set of rewrite
rules where we rewrite our sequences
as before, but the left hand side is
always and the phrasal non terminal.
And the right hand side can
include phrasal non terminals and
the lexical categories.
So by convention, for example,
often the start symbol
is taken to actually be s because
S can also stand for sentence.
But let me note that for a lot of NOP
purposes including the kind of treatments
we look at, you always have some symbol
above S, because sometimes you can find
things in text that aren't full sentences,
they might be a fragment like
a prepositional phrase, or they might
just be a whole noun phrase or something.
So we always have some symbol above
that that will rewrite as/s S or
P-P or fragment of whatever.
Commonly, that's taking
the name either root or top.
And then one fine point in here is
when you can have the right hand
side gamma be any sequence of phrasal, and
lexical categories that actually
includes the empty sequence.
But often it seems a bit funny just have
nothing on the right hand side that might
be confusing the people so
if people commonly right an italic e
to mean the right hand
side is actually empty.
Let's see all of those conventions at work
in our phrase structure grammar here.
Okay, so here we have the.
Now the phrase rewrites as NP, so
linguists often use NP categories in
grammar because it seems useful to
describe things as missing something.
So, for example, as well as having
the sentence people fish tanks,
you can make the imperative fish tanks.
Or you can have an unspecified object,
and you can say people fish.
And I don't want to get into
the linguistic analysis a lot and
this suddenly isn't
linguistically refined grammar.
But the idea is that a way you might want
to think about explaining things like this
is to say, well actually there is
a subject NP to this sentence,
but it's empty.
And there is an object, NP, here,
that it's also empty and unexpressed.
And so that's why grammars will often have
rules like this with empties in them.
And we'll come back to them and
often talk about ways of getting
rid of them and NLP a bit later.
Okay, so this is our empty, and
then the other creatures we have,
these things are called unary rules,
when one category rewrites
is another category and we have a bunch
of things here that are binary rules.
But then you're also able to have rules
where something rewrites
to three of more things.
And so here is a case that
here where a verb phrase
rewrites as a sequence of a verb noun
phrase and prepositional phrase.
And these are also things that
we often want to get rid of for
doing our NLP grammars,
as I'll explain in a bit.
Okay, so over here is our grammar rules.
And here now over here is our lexicon.
Okay, so this has just given us a phrase
structure grammar, context free grammar.
But we wanted to have
probabilities in our grammar.
So how do we go about doing that?
Well, this is really actually a very
simple extension to what we had so far.
So all of this stuff is just like
our context free grammar before, but
what we do is we add on and
say that there is one extra thing,
we have a probability function.
And so the idea of the probability
function is takes each rule and
gives it a probability; it maps it to
some real number between zero and one.
Well, you don't just let it map to any
number completely under constrain.
We add on this constraint here.
That for any non-terminal
the sums of the probabilities
of its rewrites add up to one.
So that you have a probability
distribution over how,
say, noun-phrase rewrites.
And if you make just this condition and
actually there are a couple of technical
assumptions that in practice when estimate
values of tree thinks are always true so
I want to explain here,
the end result that you get You get that
a grammar produces a language model.
In the technical sense we
introduced this before hand when
we were talking about language models.
If you look at a language model
L generated by a grammar,
here I have just expressed that, you know,
consider all sequences of terminals and
then work out their probability here.
If you sum those probabilities,
those probabilities will sum to one.
So it's a language model in
the same sense as language models.
Here's an example of a PCFG.
So it's just like what we had before,
except that now next to each role
we're giving it a probability.
So there's only rewrite for
s so it has a probability of 1 to
meet the condition we gave before.
But to take a more interesting example.
There are three re-writes for NP and
if you sum these three re-writes
up they sum to one as required.
Now this is just about the grammar that
we showed you before but I actually made
one change to it here which is I deleted
the noun phrase goes to empty rule.
And the reason I did that is this is
already a really an ambiguous grammar.
And if I left it in the example
that I'm about to show you,
would get way too ambiguous and complex as
you can try and work out for yourselves.
So it's slightly simplified.
Okay so using this PCFG.
Let's go through an example of
working with probabilities.
And so there are two things
that we want to look at.
So first of all if I draw a tree,
we can work out the probability of a tree.
And that's actually pretty easy.
All we do is actually take the
probabilities in the grammar and lexicon
and what that are used to generate the
tree and we multiply them all together.
Then the slightly trickier thing that we
want to do is the language model question.
We want to know the probability of a
string of words and well for that we have
to consider all possible tree structures
that could have generated the string.
And so the probability of
a sequence of words is the sum of
all possible trees where the tree
is the part of a sentence.
But since the tree includes
the sentence down the bottom.
That's just the sum of all
trees with that condition.
Let's look at a concrete example.
So my sentence here is
people fish tanks with rods.
And here is one pass the the grammar
generates for it and
what I've done is write next to each
parent category, what is the probability?
So this 0.4 says that the VP goes to V,
NP,
PP role and probability 0.4 But
we get this.
This is the pause where we get the
prepositional phrase modifying the verb.
That as we've seen before,
we also get the other pause
where we have the prepositional
phrase modifying the noun.
And we can write out its pause as well.
And the less ambiguous grammar without the
empty, these are the only two parsers for
this sentence.
And so doing that,
we can work out the probability for
each tree, so the probability for
each tree is just we multiply
the probabilities of each rule expansion.
And we get,
as always a very little number here.
And then, this is the probability for
the other tree during the noun attachment.
So to work out the probability of
the sequence of words, the sentence,
people fish tanks with rods, we simply
sum the probabilities of all pausers.
And that gives us this probability
here as the language model score.
And if we look at this, as well as getting
the language model score, we can also see
which paths the PCFG would chose as
the most likely parse for the same tense.
And the answer is, it's this one.
It chooses the verb attachment,
which seems like it is the most natural
reading of this sentence in English.
It might be interesting that you
guys to look and just think for
a moment more as to quiet
chooses that parse.
And if you start looking at it,
what you'll see is that a lot of
the probabilities in the tree
are exactly the same for both parses.
There's a really only one area of
difference wherein the VP attach,
we use this rewrite rule here.
Well, maybe I should draw it sort of
bigger to include that little sub-tree.
Whereas in the NP attach, we have
this VP rewrite rule, and
then we have an extra NP rewrite rule,
so this bit is different.
And so then if you look at those
that what we do is we found
that here we had a 0.4 that
was unique to this run,
and here we had,
there was sort of this piece.
A 0.6 times 0.2 which
was unique to this one.
So a 0.4 versus 0.12.
And so if you compare those,
end result is that the verb attaches 3.33,
3 and a third times more
likely than the NP attach,
purely accounted for by that difference.
That could even make you
a little bit suspicious of PCFG.
It's something we'll come back to later,
because it sort of looks like this
one's getting lower probability.
Because there's more depth to the tree,
more rewrites being done.
And PCFGs tend to have some
slightly odd effects like that.
But we'll stop that exploration there for
now and
we'll just content ourselves
by saying the PCFG.
Is choosing the right paths for
the sentence in this case and
feeling that hopefully
now you guys understand
both what context free grammar is and
its probabilistic state extension.